## Adopt SwiftGen for localizable strings

* Author: David Rodrigues
* Review Manager: Danilo Aliberti

### Introduction

Localisable strings by themselves are not a hard thing to use but for apps with a significant number of strings it's entirely impossible to remember or discover easily the respective key to use.

```swift
title = NSLocalizedString("hello_world_title", comment: "")
```

Because of this, and considering the size of our codebase, we use concrete types that map our localisable strings which enables the usage of autocomplete.

```swift
public struct LocalizationUI {
    public struct Common {
        public static var ok: String { return localizedName(key: "general_ok") }
        ...
    }
}
```

### Problems

The current approach works, as we would expect, but there's a couple of caveats in it.

##### 1. Maintenance

These types at the moment are created and managed by us manually which means any new addition/change/removal needs to be done by us. This may not look very significant but considering the number of strings, more than 3k, it is a lot to be maintained/extended.

##### 2. Safety

While these types are useful for development by enabling autocomplete they don't provide any safety since we can add a new property for a new key without necessarily adding the new string.

### Proposed Solution

SwiftGen is a code generator which is able to generate all these types and properties automatically by running a script which would fix the two main problems that we have with the current approach.

- Maintenance will be zero because everything will be mapped based on the localisable strings;
- Compile-time type safety will be guaranteed because everything will be generated from the localizable strings making it impossible to use something without being in the strings file or keep using something that was deleted.

SwiftGen also supports strings with dynamic input generating a function to be called with all the parameters which also ensures safety as we clearly know that a certain string requires some dynamic values.

We still need to ensure this script is correctly executed every time that we add/edit/remove a string but that's an easier task to manage compared to the current approach.

### Implementation

Adopting SwiftGen won't be a trivial task and would require a certain level of investment from us.

##### Location

All the symbols that we have at the moment are defined in `BabylonDependencies` and there's no reason to change this so everything can be kept as is.

##### Workflow

Our current workflow consists of pulling the strings manually and then only include the ones that are part of our current work. Adopting SwiftGen does not require any changes in our workflow so it should be kept unchanged, we should pull the strings and then run the script to generate the symbols manually. This file should be committed along with the strings to the repository to ensure we test the code without any external variables, e.g. if for some reason the generation fails we will get a failure while testing the PR on CI.

Considering there's two steps involved, pulling the strings and then run SwiftGen to generate the symbols, and based on the fact that apply some filtering we should discard any strings unrelated with our work before running SwiftGen otherwise we will end with symbols that will need to be discarded too.

##### Namespacing

Based on the convention that SwiftGen follows, `module.any_key`, and how we have our keys defined, `module_any_key`, we won't be able to mangle them into namespaces directly, we will have a huge flat list with all the strings. There's two options that we can take.

###### 1. Proposed: Rename all the keys

An alternative is to manually rename all the keys to ensure we set up the module/namespace as expected. This give us more control and ensures we can name everything in a meaningful way but requires more work from us.

However, this can be done in stages without requiring a full migration, we can start migrating feature by feature and keep both infrastructures side-by-side until we complete the migration.

But even migrationg feature by feature requires a lot of work, most of the features involve a significant number of keys that need to be renamed Lokalise. To help with the process we can write a script and use the APIs from Lokalize and apply the changes in bulk.

1. List all the keys (https://lokalise.co/api2docs/curl/#transition-list-all-keys-get)
2. Rename all the keys containing a certain prefix with the new prefix to allow the namespacing
3. Perform a bulk update (https://lokalise.co/api2docs/curl/#transition-bulk-update-put)

This would help significantly and will require just changes in the codebase at the call site to use the symbols generated by SwiftGen. And deleting the old symbols too.

It also allows a great level of flexibility since we will be able to structure the modules in a meaningful way or simply keep the current namespace that we already have in our own custom-written symbols.

###### 2. Alternative: Custom template

We can investigate if we can write our own template to treat the first `_` as the module separator and avoid renaming all the keys to have namespacing.

However, and assuming we can write this template, this option cannot deal with modules composed by multiple words which is quite common in our keys leading to namespaces that won't make much sense.

As an example, `digital_twin_first_tooltip_body`, based on this custom template would become something like this.

```swift
enum L10n {
  enum Digital {
    static let twinFirstTooltipBody = L10n.tr("chatbot.send")
  }
```

This does not reflect the module like we want/were expecting.

```swift
enum L10n {
  enum DigitalTwin {
    static let firstTooltipBody = L10n.tr("chatbot.send")
  }
```

##### Target Specific Localization

We current have two sets of strings, the main localization and one target specific to allow further customisation if/when needed. This requires custom handling where we query the target specific table first and only then we fallback to the main table. SwiftGen has support to search in other strings files but considering our specific flow we may need to write our own custom template to ensure we keep the same flow.

##### Tests

We have a couple of tests using localisable strings from the tests bundle and they will be impacted with this change. The alternative is to use the main bundle for them which can cause more failures with snapshot testing depending how often the strings get updated after being introduced. Alternatively, we can write our own custom template to keep the existent flow.

### Alternatives

There are other code generators that we can use as an alternative but SwiftGen seems the most popular in the community and we have the creator in our team 😃, if we have any issue we can have a great level of support.

The other alternative is to keep the current approach and don't make any changes although keep the problems stated above since they are not easily solvable.

### Future

Assuming this gets accepted we could use it to extend to asset catalogs and colors.
